MATH5320 – Assignment 5  
Question 1: 
 
We estimated parameters the N-day Moving window of equal weights and an Exponential 
decaying weight, where, we have: 
𝑤𝑘 = (1 − 𝜆) 𝜆𝐾, 𝑓𝑜𝑟 0 <  𝜆 < 1, 𝑘 = 0, 1, 2 … 
The average lag or the “centre of mass is:  
𝑘𝐸𝑊𝑀𝐴̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = ∑ 𝑘𝑤𝑘
∞
𝑘 = 0
= (1 − 𝜆) ∑ 𝑘𝜆𝑘
∞
𝑘 = 0
 
And then, using the equation that approximates the sum of Ams: 
∑ 𝑘𝜆𝑘
∞
𝑘 = 0
= 𝜆
(1 − 𝜆)2, 
𝑘𝐸𝑊𝑀𝐴̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = 𝜆
(1 − 𝜆) 
For an N-day window, the weights are 1/N days on lags k, from 0 ≤ k ≤ N -1, therefore the 
mean lag will be: 
𝑘𝑊𝐼𝑁̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ = 1
𝑁 ∑ 𝑘 
𝑁 − 1
𝑘 = 0
= 1
𝑁
(𝑁 − 1)𝑁
2 = 𝑁 − 1
2  
Then, we match the two averages such that: 
 
𝑘 =  𝑁 − 1
2 = 𝜆
(1 − 𝜆) → 𝜆 = 1 − 2
𝑁 + 1 = 𝑵 − 𝟏
𝑵 + 𝟏 
 


 
 
We get the following: 
Window Length 
(Years) Window Length (Days, N) Equivalent 
Lambda (λ) 
1y 252 0.992094862 
2y 504 0.996039604 
5y 1260 0.998413957 
10y 2520 0.999206664 
 
And we note that it matches: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Question 2: 
 
 
We calculated the mean, variance, and volatility for both AAPL and CAT returns using the 
simple window method, and the exponentials: 
  
 
It is notable, that despite using the overhead same mean, the exponential and window 
estimates will diverge during regime shifts as EWMA re-weights recent data more 
aggressively, so that the outputs are more responsive, but potentially noisier. Note the 
example of CAT 2y, where window vol is about 0.019, whereas EWMA vol is 0.02, which is 
a noticeable jump. Noticeably, the differences are generally bigger at shorter horizons, and 
shrink for longer horizons, as shorter windows or faster decays, means higher sensitivity to 
recent regimes. 
As seen in HW04, the lambda-weighted charts are more noisy, but more responsive, whereas 
the simple window gives equal weight to all data points within the window. The lambda-
weight does give progressively less weight to older data points, like “memory”. 
This showcases the stability and robustness issue, where small changes in market conditions 
should not produce wild swings in parameters, unless it is intended. In this case, even with 
the matched lambda, the window and EWMA aren’t identical, as the weighing shapes differ. 
This is the definition of model risk, as downstream numbers for VaR/ES inherit these 
differences.  
 
 
 
 
 


Looking further into the visualisations:  
 
 
This figure illustrates the structural difference between the window estimator and the 
exponentially weighted moving average (EWMA), even when λ is calibrated to match the 
equivalent window length. The window assigns equal weight 1 / 𝑁 to each observation within 
the horizon and zero weight beyond it, producing a flat weighting profile, whereas otoh, the 
EWMA is geometrically decaying. For longer horizons, both kernels are far more flat.  
 
Here, for the cumulative weights, it provides the “Effective memory” interpretation o the 
estimators, and sjows that the window accumulates linearly, whereas the EWMA accumulates 
rapidly in the first segment, and then occurs slowly. It does, also show why EWMA tends to 
adapt faster during market stress. 
 
 


Here, we see that the rolling mean plots compared across the two types, with largest 
divergence for the 2y. This is normal, as estimator choice matters more for shorter horizons. 
 
 
Rolling vol, shows more proncounced differences, especially during peridos of stresss. 
 
 
V ol, as a whole, shows prounounced differences, compared to the mean plots. During periods 
of elevated vol, EWMA rises faster, and it does appear that thw window estimator remains 
elevated until high vol observations exit the rolling window.  


 
As we can see here, there is a large divergence in the lower levels of horizons, getting lesser 
as “time increases” for the time horizon. 
 
Question 3: 
 
We are asked to computed 5-day risk measure (1 trading week),  by looking at the 0.99 VaR 
& 0.975 ES, with a normalised $10,000 position each day, such that the results are 
comparable over time.  
In this case, we estimate the drift and vol, through the windowed lookbacks for 2y/5y/10y, 
and then looking at the corresponding weights above.  
Like before, the daily log returns were used to model, and assuming iid returns, we have the 
scale the mean return by T, and the volatility by √T, as is custom. 
 
Notably, we have a Loss, such that it is normal, as a % based of the $10,000 given. Then we 
have the VaR, and ES, which is based off the CDF, at the corresponding p values. Note that 
ES should always be larger than the VaR. 


 
 
Note: The above looks extremely similar, so minor sanity checks was made, such that we 
have:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notably, we can see that like before, shorter window lengths, result in more volatility risk 
estimates that react far more quickly to changing market conditions. We can see that 2y is 
most reactive, and 10y the smoothest. We note that ES is always above VaR at the same time, 
with a more conservative tail average. In the plots, that can be seen, and that is to be 
expected. 


Furthermore, it is evident that the EWMA reacts slightly earlier than the same length window 
around regime shifts, given that it places a more heavy weight on recent returns, and the 
dashed vs solid lines above showcases these differences.  
We can see that in periods of stress like 2008-09, and COVID, there was a large spike in both 
VaR and ES, especially CAT in the bottom columns, being extremely volatile driven.  
The equivalent lambda does show that across the horizon, even if it is matched, the weighting 
shape differs, so the risk estimates differ. We can see that the EWMA lines are usually close 
to the window lines in level, but the EWMA responds a bit faster when vol rises or falls.  
Differences are generally most visible around the turning points in recovery or crisis. This 
does demonstrate model risk to an extent, because despite two “same” estimators, both are on 
different paths.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 4:  
 
 
In this question, we are approximating the derivative of a function, using the central 
difference method. Then, we compare it to the true derivative via the derivative error. We 
intend to replicate the image below from slide 49 from the lecture: 


 
 
The error was defined as:  
𝐷𝐸𝑟𝑟(𝛷, 𝜙, 𝑥, ℎ) = 𝜙(𝑥) − 𝐷(𝛷, 𝑥, ℎ) 
We plot the Derr, versus  x within [-3,3], for h for 10−6, 10−5, 10−4, for larger h, that the 
error curve is smoothly and highly structured, and we can see that it is dominated by the 
truncation error, from the central-difference approximation, considering the taylor expansion 
around x, we have: 
Φ(𝑥 + ℎ) = Φ(𝑥) + ℎ𝜙(𝑥) + ℎ2
2 𝜙′(𝑥) + ℎ3
6 𝜙′′(𝑥) + 𝑂(ℎ4), 
Φ(𝑥 − ℎ) = Φ(𝑥) − ℎ𝜙(𝑥) + ℎ2
2 𝜙′(𝑥) − ℎ3
6 𝜙′′(𝑥) + 𝑂(ℎ4) 
If we consider both here, subtracting it, and then dividing by 2h, gives the central difference, 
shown as follow: 
𝐷(𝛷, 𝑥, ℎ) = Φ(𝑥 + ℎ) − Φ(𝑥 −  ℎ)
2ℎ = 𝜙(𝑥) + ℎ2
6 𝜙′′(𝑥) + 𝑂(ℎ4)(𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑒𝛷′(𝑥) = 𝜙(𝑥)) 
Then, the derivative error is:  
𝐷𝐸𝑟𝑟(Φ, 𝜙, 𝑥, ℎ) = 𝜙(𝑥) − 𝐷(Φ, 𝑥, ℎ) = − ℎ2
6 𝜙′′(𝑥) + 𝑂(ℎ4), 


As such, we can ee that the leading-order error, will scale like ℎ2, will explain why ℎ =
10−4, produces a visibly larger error curve than the other values, and shows why theoretically 
the other values should provide a smaller truncation error. We can see that the large h for 
10−4, the error is smooth and shows the truncation error from the Taylor approximation. On 
the other hand, small h, it has much lower errors. But for 10−6, we can see that the truncation 
error is minimised, and we start to see floating point roundoff or cancellation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Looking into this error, where we compare the truncation vs roundoff, and we use the Taylor 
Expansion: 
Φ(𝑥 + ℎ) = Φ(𝑥) + 𝜙(𝑥)ℎ + Φ3(𝑥)
ℎ3 + ⋯ 
(𝑥 −  ℎ) = Φ(𝑥) −  𝜙(𝑥)ℎ + Φ3(𝑥)
ℎ3 + ⋯ 
And then, we subtract and divide by 2h gives: 
D(Φ, 𝑥, ℎ)  =  𝜙(𝑥) +  Φ3(𝑥)
6 ℎ2  + 𝑂(ℎ4),  
So then, here. we can see that truncation error scales pretty similar to 𝑂(ℎ2): 
𝜙(𝑥) − 𝐷(Φ, 𝑥, ℎ) = −Φ3(𝑥)
6 ℎ2 
And the idea is that when h is extremely small, the subtraction of Φ(𝑥 + ℎ) − Φ(𝑥 + ℎ), 
suffers from cancellation and floating-point noise. A simple model can be considered 
something like: 
Truncation error (scales with ℎ2), and the roundoff error, which is about 𝜖/ℎ, which is scaled 
by machine epsilon. By inspection, we can estimate the ℎ∗ from about 10−5 to 10−6. And 
then, as shown below the best choice is about:  
ℎ∗ = 6.9 ∗ 10−6 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Then, we then overlaid the two plots togethers, they are visually almost identical, as such the 
error is too small to see at the function itself. Showing below, this is evident: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An alternative approach was taken, below where we took the log-difference, and shows that 
the remaining error 10−12 to 10−10 across most of [-3, 3], which is pretty consistent with the 
earlier plots: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As such, it can be shown that the second-order accurate derivative approximation, but this 
precision creates a trade-off, where a decreasing h will reduce the truncation error, until the 
round-off error dominates. The best step size was found to be ℎ∗ = 6.9 ∗ 10−6. 
 


Question 5: 
 
Noting the BSM model with the following parameters:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We compute  𝐶(𝑆𝑡, 𝑡), which is given by:  
𝐶(𝑠) = 𝑆Φ(𝑑1) − 𝐾𝑒−𝑟𝑇Φ(𝑑2), 
And then, we computed:  
Δ𝑎𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑦𝑡𝑖𝑐(𝑆) =
𝜕𝑆
𝜕𝐶 = Φ(𝑑1), so then we run the same central difference operator as before: 
Δ𝐶𝐷(𝑆; ℎ) = 𝐷(𝐶, 𝑆, ℎ) = 𝐶(𝑆 + ℎ) − 𝐶(𝑆 − ℎ)
2ℎ  
Following this we define, and then plot the delta-error as: 
𝐸𝑟𝑟(𝑆; ℎ) = |Δ𝑎𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑦𝑡𝑖𝑐(𝑆) − Δ𝐶𝐷(𝑆;  ℎ)| 
 


\In this case, we consider the BSM price, and as shown, the curve is increase and convex as a 
call price should be. As shown, the vertical dashed line is at K = 85, which is the most visible.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The analytic delta is smooth, and naturally increases with S. Visibly, all the different h sits 
basically on top of the analytic curve. In this case, we can see that the C(S), is smooth, and 
the central difference is second-order accurate when h is reasonable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Then, we can see that finally, the model risk part is predicated in the delta error. In this case, 
we can see that at h=5, the error is the largest because of truncation error, and the finite 
difference is far too course, and we are using points that are too far apart. For the moderately 
smaller h, like h=1, h= 0.1, improves 
substantively, where we are truer to the true 
derivative. For blue, the smallest h = 0.01, it 
gives the smallest error in this range, and in this 
case, the error generally decreases as S increases, 
and as S increases relative to K, the call becomes 
deeply ITM, C(S) becomes linear in S, and the 
delta becomes close to 1 (as shown in the first 
plot), so it is far easier to approximate accurately. 
 
 


As such, we replicated the central-difference idea for the BSM model, and we can see that it 
is broadly validated. The price and delta plots, does validate the implementation, with a 
monotone price, and strong changes around K. Noticeably, the error plot, shows the classic 
numerical trade-off, with large h leading to truncation errors, and vice versa. In this case, h = 
0.01, produces the lowest delta error across the S range.  